yes thank you usually when I show up in
a city people are running away from me
so I'm glad that you're all here my work
probably embodies the idea of the art of
deception in the most literal way the
most visceral way and sometimes the most
dangerous way and I live my life and
through my work following a couple of
philosophies number one that the meaning
of life is whatever we decide it to be
and that if you want something you've
never had before you must do things you
have never done before and years ago I
decided that the purpose of my life was
going to be tracking down the world's
most extreme phenomenon the most
dangerous places documenting them and
then sharing what I've seen with as many
people as possible yes I've given my
mother quite a few gray hairs over the
years she worries about me tremendously
hurricanes tornadoes ice storms
blizzards sandstorms they're all on the
menu for me I even managed to convince
my wife to have our wedding on the side
of an exploding volcano what started off
as a hobby
seriously what started off as a hobby
ended up becoming more of a lifestyle
and I'm probably best known for the
angry Planet TV series which airs all
over the world it has taken me to over
40 countries every single continent
basically tracking down these different
forces of nature and I look at nature
from a very different rather unique
perspective than most I try to find the
art in the most destructive events on
the planet and it's not easy to do and
it takes me all over the world to do it
and my obsession
with severe weather started with
tornadoes and many many years ago for
about 15 years ago I started chasing
tornadoes and they are very difficult to
find the central United States tornado
alley gets between 800 to 1200 tornadoes
every single year that's more than
anywhere else in the world and trying to
find them is like trying to find a
needle in a haystack
while the haystack is moving at 80
kilometers an hour and destroys
everything in its path so I have to get
into position where I can see the
tornado but not be in the path of the
tornado and they are these amazing
swirling sculptures of nothing more than
air and water vapor and the storms that
produce these tornadoes can be twice the
height of Mount Everest concentrating
all of its energy on a single point
that's grinding up a farmer's field and
when you see them moving across the
plains it looks like an alien ship has
come down and is coming straight for you
like a scene out of Independence Day and
yes indeed there is some danger involved
of course I am very happy to say I have
never broken a single bone or had any
serious injuries of any kind in all of
my adventures the tornadoes themselves
they don't even look like they should be
real it's this very very surreal
sculpture of air like I mentioned before
and nature itself does not create art
there is no art in nature everything has
a purpose the storms are formed because
of the atmosphere trying to balance out
areas of high and low pressure
earthquakes form because you have these
tectonic plates that are pushing against
each other very slowly on a geological
scale even the feathers on a peacock are
not artistic they are there for a very
specific biological reason to attract a
mate so art is something that we create
we decide what is art and it's
individual what is art for you
is very different to what is art for
every other person and that's why we all
have so many different interpretations
of a painting or a sculpture and I see
art everywhere in nature but nature
itself does not produce the artist us
who decide that the art is there and I
try to pull the art out of nature
through photography now of course not
everyone shares the same sentiment as me
of course there are people that are
affected negatively thousands of people
every year have their homes destroyed
some lose their lives unfortunately due
to these natural disasters and my being
there will have no bearing on whether it
occurs or not but if I can capture that
moment on film and show it to people
perhaps the next time one of these
storms is coming for them they'll heed
the warnings and seek shelter I even
send reports to the National Weather
Service to warn people that are in the
path of these storms so hopefully in
addition to documenting these events
maybe I've actually even saved a few
lives and one of the most dramatic
examples I had recently was the tornado
that hit Joplin Missouri
it was an ef5 tornado the scale only
goes up to five so it's the strongest
worst baddest type of tornado and I
never actually saw with my own eyes it
was completely wrapped in rain hail and
rain will move around the tornado and it
forms like the bars of a cage and we
call it the Bears cage because there's
an angry bear that's in there that wants
to get at you if you get too close and I
knew that this tornado was going to be
approaching this city it was my birthday
of all days and I had with me a group of
people that I was taking on a
storm-chasing trip I was guiding them
and I'm driving the lead vehicle and I
knew that we were getting very close and
it was up to me to decide how close I
should get to this invisible tornado
that was completely wrapped up in rain
and I got within I would say about two
minutes of this tornado once we reached
the area where it had crossed the road
things changed very very rapidly we
stopped being storm chasers and we ended
up becoming first responders there were
at least a dozen cars flipped over on
the road tractor trailers on there rubes
on their side
we halted the chase put down our cameras
ran out into the rain and started to
help people and the scene there was
unlike anything that I had ever seen
before complete devastation there was
someone who had a very bad head wound we
had to split up our group take him to
the hospital
but the hospital had also taken a direct
hit from the tornado so this was like a
warzone and at the time we were very
happy to help out but I went back a few
weeks later because I wanted to try and
find some artistic aspect of this
terrible event I wanted to try and pull
some good out of it and I was able to
find some images there of old
photographs amongst the rubble of a
demolished neighborhood there were
instances of signs that had been ripped
out of the ground peeled and curled by
the power of the wind I want to find
images that show the human impact but
also the extreme power of nature at the
same time and blend them together there
were pieces of doors embedded in the
side of a tree so hard that I could not
pull them out no matter how hard I tried
and this was a disaster area the
interesting thing about disasters in art
they have something very much in common
art only exists because we decided
exists so do disasters
if this tornado had not hit the city it
would not have been a disaster
these events only become disasters when
they affect human populations
if Hurricane Katrina had stayed out in
the ocean it would have never been a
disaster so it is us that makes that
determination and one of the interesting
factors that really plays into this is
the number of people on the planet we
have seven billion people now and as the
population grows more and more people
are living in areas that are prone to
these catastrophe
and as that increases we're going to see
worse and worse disasters as these
phenomena become disasters and that's
not even taking into consideration the
effects of climate change so
unfortunately I think I'm going to be
very busy over the next decade
unfortunate for the people that see me
coming for their are for their town
people fall into one of two different
categories they say wow that's amazing
what you do is so cool I would love to
do that or they say George you're
completely crazy why do you do it
very seldom to someone fall in the
middle in between and it's not just
storms it's also other different forces
of nature that I love to document of
course erupting volcanoes are absolutely
beautiful when they're not affecting a
population this is Samara volcano in
Java I climbed to the summit of this
volcano as it was erupting but in the
morning light you can see it's
absolutely beautiful it's like like a
sculpture made of ash really fantastic
in the Congo there is a volcano called
Neera gongo and it is one of the most
beautiful sights a human can ever behold
looking down into the crater there is a
lake of lava that's 300 meters wide it's
bubbling and rippling away it's like a
window into the center of the earth
itself absolutely stunning Krakatoa
volcano one of the most famous volcanoes
of all time in 1883 it had the largest
eruption and it was heard 2,000
kilometres away it still erupts now
sometimes spewing up lightning in the
ash column very very spectacular but
hard to find like an artist well I guess
I am an artist but different types of
artists go for different types of
effects for example a sculptor deals
with texture well for me I go to places
like Antarctica to find texture these
glaciers can be a thousand years old and
the wonderful blue hues that you see are
absolutely artistic and wonderful and
seeing pieces of the glacier break off
and forming these brand-new icebergs is
just stunning it's like a nursery for
icebergs and it is indeed a wonderful
artistic texture symmetry and pattern is
also common in artwork and I find it in
places that have been for example
covered in 50 centimeters of snow that
have fallen overnight those are cars by
the way under there I don't know which
one is mine but there it's under there
somewhere the pastel colors of the
Sahara Desert blowing around and these
wonderful sandstorms are just something
that transcends just reality and it's
interesting because the weather
transcends all aspects of our lives it
is the thing that affects every aspect
from what we wear to how we build our
homes to what kind of car we drive so it
really is a driving force in our lives
sometimes of course at its most extreme
it becomes a five senses event flying in
a helicopter over top of towering forest
fires was something that's very
difficult to describe in a photograph
because you're smelling the smoke you're
feeling the heat you're tasting it
you're hearing the sound of the fire and
it really is something that artistically
is difficult to convey fully sometimes
the things that I encounter only lasts
less than a second
lightning can burn five times hotter
than the surface of the Sun and can be a
hundred million volts all happening in
the flash of a second and trying to
capture that on camera is an extremely
difficult thing but very rewarding
because it's the cloud in the electrical
charge that actually creates the pattern
of light I never know exactly what it's
going to look like until after the
photograph is done of course there is
danger involved in what I do getting hit
by giant waves in hurricanes
there's just so many things that I have
to worry about when I go to work but we
are so separated from nature we get up
in our air-conditioned homes we go in
our air-conditioned cars we drive to our
air-conditioned office when was the last
time you physically touched a tree we
have such a disconnect right now and
people say to me all the time what
what's it like being men versus nature
well I don't look at it that way at all
mankind is as much a part of nature as
any tree any bird any fish in the ocean
we have to learn our place in nature by
accepting the fact that we are indeed a
part of it as much as anything else that
is in nature and I really learned this
lesson when I was in India I was there
during the monsoon season and there were
children playing in the flood waters
their entire neighborhood had been
flooded out and they were having fun
they were looking forward to this
weather because they could take out
their homemade styrofoam boat and paddle
around through their neighborhood and
they invited me to come out and join
them and of course the boat was
straining under the weight of me but we
were having a great time and I was able
to see their world through their eyes
and it was such such a transcendent
experience because they were able to not
only cope with their weather and
situation but it actually became an
integral part of their everyday lives
they were not nearly as separated from
it and as much as I go into these
dangerous situations and try and capture
these things I find it as important for
me to share what I have seen with the
world because I feel like I have an
obligation I have
luckily been able to experience things
that most people either won't be able to
or certainly don't want to and by
sharing it with the world I feel that I
can at least show people how bad bad can
really be and the art of disruption
certainly does describe what I do and I
want to thank you so much for allowing
me the opportunity to share with you my
world and maybe just maybe you'll
perceive your spot in the natural world
just a little differently
you